Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. Today, I'm joined by Doctor Brianna Pobiner. She
is a paleoanthropologist and educator at the Smithsonian National
Museum of Natural History in the US. Her research
centers on the evolution of human diet, and today
we're talking most. ABOUT that, but we'll also get
into the diet of some other closely related species
like chimpanzees and toward the end, we're going to
talk a little bit about some of the bigger
challenges of teaching human evolution. So, Doctor Poiner, welcome
to the show. It's a huge pleasure to have
you on.
Oh, thank you for inviting me.
OK, so before we get into our diet and
chimpanzee diet and the diet of possibly other ominents,
let me just ask you, uh, how can we
study the diet of species from the past, species
who are already extinct? What are perhaps some of
the main tools that we have at our disposal
and then the kinds of sources we can draw
evidence from.
Yeah, so there's a, the, the cool thing in
my thinking about studying diets is there's a lot
of different lines of evidence. So you can have,
uh, what archaeologists often study is almost the trash
and things that are kind of left over after
humans, modern humans and their ancient relatives and cousins
ate things. So that could be tools, that could
be animal, fossil bones, um, that could be leftovers
of plant debris, even pieces of insects, things like
that. So it can be like, Parts of the
food and things that were left, the tools that
were used to, you know, process the food or
catch the food. Um, BUT it can also be
things like actually the chemistry of fossil bones and
teeth that can tell us a little bit about
maybe what kinds of plants were, um, being eaten
by early humans or, you know, other kinds of
animals. Um, AND, um, you can even look at
the more the basic size and shape of things
like our teeth and jaws to get a sense
of adaptation. So there's, there's a variety of different
kinds of evidence.
When it comes to studying the evolution of human
diet, what are some of the best animal models
we can study and draw information from? I mean,
what are the kinds of animals we can better
compare ourselves to?
Yeah, so most of the time people use other
primates. So primates, we are primates. That's how we
fit into the tree of life. So our closest
living relatives are chimpanzees and bonobos, not our ancestors,
but basically cousins. And so we shared a common
ancestor with chimpanzees maybe 6 or 7 million years
ago. So they're potentially a good model. Other great
apes, so humans, chimps, gorillas, orangutans, or other great
apes, but even some other primates like baboon. WHO
live today in environments that we think were similar
to those that our ancestors evolved in. So yeah,
primates, I think, are generally the best models. Sometimes
when we think about meat eating, we can look
at other carnivores and predators. We can also look
at other omnivorous species because we are omnivores and
really always have been. So but from kind of
a phylogenetic, like an evolutionary perspectives, primates usually make
the best models.
Oh, you said that you were, that we are
omnivores and have always been, that's already a controversial
statement to make nowadays because there are people who
make some. Uh, VERY interesting claims about the human
diet. We're going to get into some of those
claims later on. But, uh, so, you mentioned the
primates, you also mentioned primarily chimpanzees and bonobos. So
about chimpanzees, what do we know about their diet?
And in what extent can we draw information from
them and their behavior and compare to the omin?
So I think, you know, using both chimpanzees and
bonobos are good models. Like I said, they're our
closest living relatives. Um, THEY live in the parts
of Africa where, or the, you know, environments that
are probably similar to that when, when early humans
evolved, um. And chimpanzees have a pretty flexible diet,
but they are mostly plant eaters, fruits, feeds, different,
you know, different kinds of different parts of plants,
but they also eat insects. They also eat some
meat. So on average, chimpanzee groups, about 3% of
their diet comes from meat from smaller animals, much
smaller than themselves. So I think we can look
at both the components of diet, but also kind
of behavior. Chimpanzees use tools sometimes to actually get
their food, and we can look at things like
when they are searching for food and when they
are accessing food when they're eating food, hunting. SMALLER
primates so we can use both sort of behavior
models but also even models of like what does
it look like when chimpanzees eat food? What kind
of marks does it leave on their teeth? Are
those good models for what we might find in
early human ancestors and what how the traces of
diets might have, you know, made print imprints on
their teeth, for example.
So let me ask you this because earlier you
also mentioned baboons and other primates. So what are
the main criteria criteria you use to determine that
we can learn something about the evolution of our
own diet by studying another. Is it uh that
they lived in in a similar environment and so
they could have had access to similar sorts of
food? Does it have anything to do with their
dentition or their digestive tract? What are perhaps some
of the criteria that you use?
So I would say all of those as well
as their evolutionary relationship to us. So primates that
are very, you know, sort of distantly related to
us might not be as good models, maybe they
have kind of more frugivorous like they're fruit eaters
or they're folivorres. They're really focused on leaves, so
they might not be the best models, but I
think habitats that they live in, what their social
structures are like, how they actually get their food,
what their tooth morphology and skull morphology is like,
digestive tracts, and so all of those really.
Mhm. Yeah, the bit about sociality is very interesting
because, I mean, I, I would imagine that many
people wouldn't think about learning about the sociality of
a particular species to then infer some things about,
uh, what they ate. Because in the case of
humans, for example, since we are so cooperative, I
mean, that's a potential source of evidence to then
determine that we also uh hunted large prey, right?
Exactly. So I do think that's exactly where kind
of social behavior comes into play and thinking about
how food is, you know, gathered and hunted and
things like that. So I think exactly.
And so in your own work, and now I'm
focusing just on hominids. Now how far back in,
in our revolutionary history do you go, I mean,
what species do you study the most? Mhm.
So I, because I'm interested mainly in the origin
and evolution of meat eating, we have the earliest
evidence, solid evidence for that going back almost 3
million years, maybe a little bit earlier. I've tended
to focus on between about 2 million, 1 million
years ago, sometimes a little bit older or later.
But really in the realm mostly of a species
called Homo erectus, which is probably sort of our
grandparent ancestor. So Homo erectus likely evolved into another
species called Homo Heidelbergensis in Africa, and they probably
evolved into Homo sapiens. So, but Homo erectus was
the longest lived hominin on the human family tree.
The first one that we have good evidence migrated
out of Africa to different parts of the world,
and really the first one that we start to
see an uptick in, including meat in the diet.
So for that reason, I think that's kind of
the species in the time period that I'm most
interested in.
Yeah, so you said that it is in Homo
erectus that we see an uptake in in eating
meat, but so before or previous to Homo erectus,
Homo erectus, there were already other species eating meat
or
not. Yeah, so it's, it's very likely. Homo erectus
evolved about 2 million years ago, a little bit
less, and we have good evidence for at least
like episodic meat eating in the zooarchaeological record and
the record of fossil animal bones going back to
at least 2.5, 2.6, 2.9, maybe 3.4 million years
ago. So species earlier than Homo erectus ate meat
and so the form of that evidence. IS in
butchered animal bones, but if we look at chimpanzees
like we talked about, it's very like so chimpanzees
eat meat from smaller animals. They don't tend to
use tools to butcher those animals to eat meat.
So my thinking is probably really from the earliest
hominins that there probably was a small component of
meat eating. It just may not be archaeologically visible.
Mhm. And when you mentioned meat, uh, are insects
part of it or
not? That's a good question. I don't think of
insects as part of meat eating. It's certainly they're
a good source of protein, um, but I would,
I think of them in a different category. And
the other thing I should say is I tend
to say meat, but what I'm really talking about
is anything from an animal. So it's also very
likely that some of the earliest, um, Animal tissue
eating was not just focused on meat but it
was focused on marrow inside of bones, great source
of fat and calories,
and maybe eggs from certain species or not.
Absolutely. So eggs, I think, you know, and, and
probably a lot of smaller species that we might
find there remains an archaeological site lizards, birds, things
that you don't actually need tools to maybe catch.
Take apart and so, and maybe we will, you
know, I think that the studies of what human
or hominid tooth marks look like on bones is
still, I would say maybe up and coming. So
I think there are still ways that we might
be able to recognize some of this that we
don't have now.
And so what were some of the biggest changes
that occurred when Homo erectus comes into the picture
when it comes to our consumption of meat?
So interestingly, there's been a narrative for a long
time that Homo erectus evolves. You get a much
more modern human-like body size and shape, kind of
taller, leaner, and then about a million years ago
you get this big increase in brain size, and
there's been an idea that Homo erectus comes along,
probably ventured a lot more. Widely across the landscape
we do see evidence for meat eating in some
ways intensifying at the time of Homo erectus, although
some research I did with colleagues showed that that
seems to be kind of in pulses and not
so much a sustained increase in carnivory, and that
may just be because of the archaeological sites that
we've been focusing on. Um, AND so we do
see changes in adaptations in Homo erectus, um, but
we see the earliest meat eating much earlier than
that. Um, SO we, again, we see it sort
of episodic here and there in the archaeological record.
It tends to be what we do see around
the time of Homo erectus though, interestingly, of the
evolution of Homo erectus, there's a In Kenya called
Kanjara South, and it's dated to about 2 million
years ago, and those 2 million year layers have
multiple layers of butchered animal bones where probably Homo
erectus was going back over and over again to
butcher animals. So it's not just one animal here,
a couple animals there. It's this is a spot
where we come to do this. So I I
think that is a shift that looks interesting that
is right now coincident with the evolution of Homo
erectus.
So I'm not sure if this question makes sense,
but one of the things I associate with Homo
erectus is the use of fire and cooking. So
did that influence in any way the fact that
Homo erectus have an uptick in the. OF meat.
I mean, because when we cook things, it's easier
for us to digest them, right, including meat. So
did that have any influence there or not?
So that's a good question, and I would say
the jury is still out on that. So it's
an interesting idea. We don't have really solid evidence
for a lot of cooking with Homo erectus early
on. Um, WE do see, I would say, more
sustained evidence for cooking maybe by half a million
years ago. So I think it's also pretty difficult
to detect in the archaeological record in a way
that is convincing and not just this could be
a, you know, natural brush fire or something like
that. So I think maybe, but I would say
we don't have the evidence to make that solid
tie right now.
OK, and in regards to hominids, I mean, I
think you've already mentioned some of that, but what
are the main sources of evidence that point to
a particular hominin having eaten meat? Uh, HOW do
we?
This is a really tricky question because unless we
find a hominin sort of with a tool in
its skeletal hand butchering an animal, most of the
time we don't actually know which hominin was butchering
particular animals. So we can look at what's the
time horizon, what hominins were around in this time
and place and make a potential link. We can
look at. The tooth morphology, jaw morphology, other adaptations
like the size of the gut, and so that
went from a more chimpanzee sort of, you know,
wider gut to narrower and Homo erectus, so we
can make some inferences, but I think it's actually
really tough to tie specific hominin species until we
get to species like Neanderthals when they were the
only hominins around in. Places in Europe and Western
Asia at certain time periods and they were definitely
the ones hunting and butchering animals. But I think
where we have Homo erectus, Paranthropus boisei, maybe Homo
habilis, other species that were coexisting, it's hard to
say which one was actually doing the meat eating,
although we have tended to assume that it was
members of the genus Homo like Homo erectus and
Homo habilis.
And so can we also look at the cranium
as a source of evidence in the sense that
perhaps there would be a link between meat consumption
and brain size
or not? So potentially, so this was that was
part of that narrative I mentioned before, an idea
called the expensive tissue hypothesis. So our brain tissue
is very energetically expensive. It sort of costs a
lot of. TO maintain big brains and the other
really energetically expensive tissues in our bodies are our
guts. And so with the evolution of Homo erectus
we see smaller guts, probably less gut tissue, and
we start to see increases in brain size. We'd
see a really big, a much bigger increase in
brain size relative to body size at about a
million years ago. So sort of the brain. BODY
size, you know, evolves larger in tandem until then.
So maybe, I mean, I think meat has been
put forth as a source of the release on
the constraint of the evolution of bigger brain size,
but maybe it's not meat, maybe it's cooked, not
just meat, but maybe it's cooked meat, maybe it's
other things, maybe so, but it's, it's definitely an
interesting idea.
So one of the things that you mentioned earlier,
we can look into our marks on bones, right,
cutting marks. So, uh, but how do we know
or is it even possible for us to know
for sure that particular marks were done intentionally to
consume the meat?
Yeah, it's a good question. And when I have
to ask myself a lot because this is a
core part of what I study. A lot of
what I do is look at fossils, observe marks
on them, and try to figure out where these
marks left by ancient stone knives, were they left
by carnivore teeth? Were they left by the bone
rolling around in a river and getting rubbed with
sand. Um, SO basically experimental archaeology is a very
big help in this where we can do butchery
experiments, look at carnivores, you know, eating their prey
and see what the basically the size and shape
and pattern of those marks look like. There there
are good studies that show that you can differentiate
between marks left by butchery tools, carnivore teeth, crocodile
teeth, and like sedimentary abrasion, many of them, but
not all of them. So again, it's kind of
the size, shape, the pattern, also where on the
bone the marks are. Are they in a place
where there's a muscle attachment, a place where two
bones join together where people might have been trying
to take apart or disarticulate the bones? Um, YEAH.
And so this is why it's so important for
us to draw from as many different sources of
evidence as we can because the marks just by
themselves would, would probably not tell us or give
us enough information about our diet or our eating
meat in this case.
I mean, I think if you, you know, if,
if you find marks that are very clearly butchery
marks, you can say hominins were eating meat or
at least cutting off meat from these animals. So
I think that, you know, you can. That solid
tie, but I think, you know, again, we've had
great, you know, research teams who have done excellent
studies to be able to differentiate what marks are
what. Most of the time, some of them are
very ambiguous though.
And so after Homo erectus and between Homo erectus
and Homo sapiens, I mean the species that like
Homo idolbergensis, what do we know about their diet?
Did anything, anything major change or not?
Yeah, good question. So we have some of it
is that again the evidence for what hominins were
eating is not always coupled with the evidence for
what hominin was actually doing that eating. So sometimes
it's, I think about it as more broad like
hominin diets overall, but we do see things like
even with Homo erectus, we see by about a
little less than 2 million years ago, not just
consuming meat from terrestrial animals but also from aquatic
animals. See, you know, the earliest evidence of really
roasting and eating fish, a paper that came out
a couple of years ago at a site in
Israel by about 800,000 years ago. We start to
see slowly a little bit more choice in what
animals were being hunted. Larger animals, the kind of
prime age adult animals we see. I think it
was probably with Homo er sorry, with Homo Heidelbergensis
and then with Neanderthals where there's, there's more selectivity
and I think hunting is probably becoming more common
and more more practiced. So as opposed to probably
doing more scavenging, at least of bigger animals earlier
on.
So now to get into a topic that I
I alluded to earlier in our conversation, sometimes we
hear about a supposed paleo diet, but is there
really a paleo diet?
My short answer is I don't think so, but
the caveat is that there, there probably were specific
diets at certain places and certain times that by
certain species, but I think human diets are so
flexible today and very culturally mediated. But the idea
that there was a single paleo diet like ancient
people ate lots of meat or ancient people ate
mostly plants, I think is really an oversimplification.
And we can also look into contemporary traditional societies
as potential proxies for uh the kinds of more
ancient societies we lived in, right? And the way
they and the kinds of foods that they eat.
Absolutely. And so I think there have been great
ethnographic studies of people that live in polar areas
and what kinds of foods that they eat and
what adaptations those have even led to people in
tropical areas. And so that's the other thing is
that you know there's such a great diversity in
modern human contemporary diets, historic diets that, but I
do think There is a wealth of evidence in
there that we can use as models for ancient
diets.
One thing that I've heard many anthropologists saying is
that basically when we look across the when we
look into diets across the world in human societies
and even what we know from Uh, the diets
of ancient societies is that basically people ate what
they have available in the specific place they lived.
So there, there's even the example of, I think
the, the as the or the, the bushmen in
Africa who uh ate at for, uh, I mean,
for a period of months in the year, they
ate mostly honey or something like that.
Absolutely. No. And so I think eating what's local,
if there is a paleo diet, maybe it's really
eating what's locally available, and that's going to change
throughout the year. That's going to depend on where
you live. So sometimes people will ask me because
I study the paleo diet, like, do you eat
the paleo diet? And I say, yeah, I eat
whatever I find in the supermarket and maybe what
my husband cooks for me. So I, yeah, exactly.
Yeah, because you, you know, many times we hear
these grandiose claims about human diet. Like, for example,
there are the carnivore people who claim that we
evolved eating just only meat, then sometimes we hear
from vegans that we are not omnivorous at all,
that we ate just plants and carbs and stuff
like that. But, but these kinds of claims do
not make much sense, right?
No, I don't think that the extreme diet claims
are really grounded in good evidence from the past.
I think that, you know, people can have and
should have choice about what they eat and whether
they're eating for health and heart health or weight
loss or any of those things. But yeah, I
mean, We, I don't think there's good evidence that
we ever only ate meat or only ate plants,
at least, you know, after the meat from big
animals started to come into our diets. So the
idea also that hominins would have just excluded big
categories of food, legumes and starchy vegetables and other
things like that. I just, I don't see evidence
for that.
And also there's the caveat that when we think
about uh modern I, I mean modern humans, not
in the sense that you talk about them in
anthropology, but humans that live, that are alive now,
that we are also the result of a sort
of a gene culture co-evolutionary process. And so the
people who were or Evolved in agricultural societies also
eventually evolved specific adaptations to process, for example, cereal,
milk, and stuff like that.
Yes, and those are actually some of my favorite
examples of recent evolution in humans adaptation to be
able to consume lactose, the sugar, milk, sugar, and
dairy, and genetic adaptations. Starch digestion in cultures where
there was a lot of starch consumed, I think
that's exactly right. And those are good examples of
how, you know, even in the last 10,000, 20,000
years, human diets have changed drastically, and there have
been adaptations in different human populations based on those
diets, that gene culture co-evolution like you said.
Yeah. And I asked you that because sometimes we
hear from some people that wherever, whatever we started
eating when we developed agriculture, we, we haven't had
enough time to devolve adaptations to process cereals, milk,
beer, and stuff like that.
Exactly. I have heard that argument. Times and I
think there's great evidence to show that's absolutely not
the case.
So let me now for a more controversial question
or a more controversial topic, you've also, you've also
done a bit of work on human cannibalism. So
what do we know about that both in ancient
societies and possibly in contemporary societies?
Yeah, and so I sort of stumbled into work
on human cannibalism in a sense. So it's not
a big focus of my research, but I was
studying fossil human, human fossils, ancient human fossils, hominid
fossils. I normally just study the animal fossils. I
was interested in looking at those fossils from Kenya
to get a sense of what carnivores may have
actually been eating our ancestors. And surprisingly, I actually
found butchery marks on one of those hominid fossils.
So possibly cannibalism, people cutting apart each other and
maybe eating each other. It seems to be cannibalism
seems to be, you know, an intermittent, also part
of our evolutionary history, much deeper back in time.
Certainly there are contemporary populations that Practice cannibalism or
at least historic populations that have for a variety
of reasons. Some of it is kind of aggressive
cannibalism where, you know, it has to do with
warfare. Some of it is really, you know, wonderful
rituals that have to do with honoring ancestors. So
again, all culturally mediated really and a whole variety
of reasons, but it does seem to be a
part of human cultures.
But is it that it tends to occur more
in specific circumstances like I don't know when we
have a particular kind of ecology or certain cultural
practices, how
does it. That's a good question that I don't
know the answer to. I certainly from the reading
that I've done about cannibalism, there are a lot
of the earlier examples are probably what are called
what's nutritional cannibalism. Basically people are hungry and starving,
and that's why they tend to maybe eat other
people in their group. OR maybe another group again,
it may still have to do with culture and
aggression, but I don't know if there's a kind
of patterns about where for historic and modern humans
whether cannibalism has been practiced in specific ecologies areas,
social circumstances, I don't know the answer to that.
It's a good question.
Yeah. No, it would be very interesting to know
that because, I, I mean, of course, there are
probably certain societies where, uh, a taboo against, uh,
eating human meat is not, uh, very prevalent. I,
I mean, it's not as big as what we
have in our more modern. Industrialized societies and stuff
like that. But it could be that certain the
societies where that happens, that is the result of
the particular ecological conditions they live in. And that
would be simply sort of, um, I don't know,
a form of evoked culture or something like that.
Yeah,
it could be. Mhm.
So, I then have one last topic I would
like to ask you about. As I said at
the beginning, you've also talked about and write about
uh some of the challenges of communicating about and
teaching about human history, human evolution, sorry. So what
would you say are the biggest challenges there?
So I think there's a few categories of big
challenges. One is that there are people that have
deep religious faith that find human evolution a really
uncomfortable idea based on their religious teachings. And so
I think that's kind of one category. Also, um,
evolution is not an easy topic to understand a
lot of the time. So I think there's just
basically sort of cognitive challenges to thinking about the
deep time scales over which a lot of evolution
occurs are hard for us to comprehend. Um, SO
yeah, and I think there's also, you know, evolution
has been, it, uh, you know, sometimes politicized and
also from a social perspective, I think there are
ideas about like, you know, what, what you accept
in your cultural and social group. So I think
it's, you know, those are kind of the main
challenges I would say.
Mhm. So, would you say that perhaps one of
the big challenges has to do with it not
being very intuitive? I mean, when we think in,
in evolutionary terms, uh, of course, eventually we'll learn
to think that way, but at the beginning, it's
not very intuitive,
right? Exactly. And there have been really interesting studies
with children about like teaching the building blocks of.
AND that there, you know, there's, there's other ways
of thinking that tend to be more intuitive that
are sort of some of it is a little
bit Lamarckian, like the, you know, acacia tree in
back of me, that maybe giraffes necks grew longer,
um, just in order to reach those trees. So
the idea of like change happening because of a
need, like there's a couple of categories of really
common misconceptions about evolution that are just Um, I
don't know, kind of shortcut thinking that makes sense.
And so, um, trying to teach, teach the, you
know, actual evidence and things can be a little
bit challenging.
Mhm. And of course, you've already mentioned some of
the reasons, but uh thinking about when you try
to teach human evolution to people, what would you
say are perhaps some of the main reasons why
so many people tend to reject that we are
the result of evolutionary processes?
I think, yeah, a couple of reasons. One, as
I mentioned about, you know, spiritual or religious faith,
thinking about how humans are in many ways we
think of ourselves as really special, really different. How
could that have possibly evolved through natural processes? It
all For many people takes away from the specialness,
and it can be a little bit of a
scary perspective if you think that it, you know,
the only natural processes led to modern humans. So
I think um there's also ways of thinking of
that as beautiful and about humans connected to nature.
Um SO yeah, so I think, I think um.
IT'S, it's both kind of a, you know, religious
spiritual perspectives. There's also unfortunately been, you know, biological
anthropology and ideas about human evolution have had a
lot of racism in the history of the discipline
and so I think there's Also some understandable rejection
of ideas of human evolution based on past racist
ideas of a hierarchy of types of people which
I think the discipline is working hard to really
reckon with and try to, you know, to correct
and undo.
Do you think that uh when people write, for
example, for a general audience, for, for the general
population to try to teach them about human evolution
that they should be a bit careful in the
ways they expose information because you mentioned, for example,
racism there and I, I'm not uh Naming any
names here, but there are people that also probably
the ways they oversimplify how our evolution occurred might
lead to people acquiring wrong ideas about it,
right? Yes, absolutely. I think scientists and other experts.
WE need to take a lot of care with
the language that we use. I think, you know,
the balance between making things understandable and accessible and
taking shortcuts that can be misunderstood is something we
really need to pay good attention to, particularly when
we're writing or talking for the public about human
evolution. Absolutely.
And by the way, and this will be my
last question, what do you think are perhaps some
of the things that you like the most when
it comes to teaching human evolution?
Um, I think, you know, humans, all humans alive
today are the result of 6 million years of
evolution, um, and so thinking about Yes, we're the
only human species left on the family tree, and
I think that gives us pause, but I think
it's also amazing to think about really the unity
of modern humans. We, a lot of us look
different. We feel like there's so much differences among.
BUT I actually think that human evolution can be
kind of lessons in deep human unity and that
we're pretty persistent. Homo sapiens, our species. We have
persisted where, you know, maybe 20 plus species on
the human family tree have gone extinct. Um, SO
I think that's one of the things I like.
Also, oftentimes when I'm working with school groups or
visitors in our museum and you watch particularly kids
like get it, and oh, this is, oh, and
I can do this, and oh, and I can
be part of the discovery process and I can
see this piece of evidence. I love watching like
faces light up like that, so I really enjoy
that.
And the way by which we are interrelated and
when people learn about that, I guess it would
also be at least in certain cases, a very
potent thing against or a very potent way of
fighting back against racism and all of that,
exactly, exactly. So I think that, you know, hopefully
we can sort of use human evolution in a
sense for that sort of good in our discipline.
Yeah, because we are all ultimately African, right?
That's the origin of our species, absolutely, and we're
all related. We're all cousins in some way. So
I think that's a really important message.
OK, great. So before we go, would you like
to tell people where they can find you and
your work on the internet?
Sure, so you can find me and my work
on Facebook, Twitter, if you search my name on
both of those Instagram, but also if you want
to learn more about my research, you can go
to human origins.si.edu. And find me under the the,
you know, human evolution, the human origins program, people.
You can also Google my name and I have
a research page on the Smithsonian Natural History Museum
website that talks a little bit more about all
the different research projects that I have.
Great. So I will be leaving some links to
that in the description of the interview, and Dr.
Paulinner, thank you so much again for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been fun
talking to you.
Yeah, thank you. It was a really enjoyable conversation
for me too.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullern, Fredrik Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alexandam Castle, Matthew Whitting Berarna Wolf, Tim Hollis, Erika
Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the Matter
Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Neevs called Holbrookfield governor Michael
Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnseroro and Hal Herzognun
Macha Joan Labrant John Jasent and Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus Fran David Sloan
Wilson, asilla dearraujuru and roach Diego Londono Correa. Yannick
Punter Darusmani Charlotte blinikolbar Adamhn Pavlostaevskynaleb medicine, Gary Galman
Sam of Zallidrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall Edin Bronner. Douglas Fry, Franca Bortolotti, Gabriel Ponscorte
or Slelisky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffy, Sonny Smith,
John Wieman, Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgia, Luke
Lovai Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wozin, David Williams,
Diocosta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez,
Corale Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old
Erringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grayigoren, Jeff
McMann, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner,
Luke Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica
Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis,
Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam
Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursulauddinov,
Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and
Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers. These
are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffini, Tom Venneden, Bernard
Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick
Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden,
and to my executive producers, Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian,
Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.